p8105_group_proposal
================
NSK, ST (sjt2164), Shayne Estill(ske2118), WS
2024-11-06

## P8105: Group Proposal Submission

Shayne Estill (ske2118) , WooJin Shin (ws2721), Naomi Simon-Kumar
(ns3782), Serena Ting (sjt2164)

#### Tentative Project Title

The impact of NYC Environmental Determinants on Children’s Health

#### Motivation for this project

Children’s health and development is impacted by the surrounding
environment, particularly in dense urban environments like New York City
(NYC). Poor air quality due to urban air pollution can influence and
have long-term consequences for child and adolescent respiratory health.
The challenges of urban environmental health are further complicated by
climate change, particularly through the urban heat island effect, which
can increase the risk of heat-related illnesses (Heaviside et al.,
2017). Limited research shows that elevated temperatures due to the
urban heat island effect are associated with increased emergency
department (ED) visits among children (Sheffield et al., 2018). These
health outcomes may be influenced by the availability of green spaces,
which can help filter air pollutants and provide cooler areas for
shelter from heat. Importantly, environmental health risks
disproportionately affect children from low-income neighborhoods and
communities of color, where there is often limited access to green
spaces and higher exposure to environmental stressors.

Through this project, we aim to investigate how these interconnected
environmental determinants- air quality, green space availability, and
urban heat patterns - vary across NYC boroughs and their potential
associations with children’s health, specifically focusing on
respiratory outcomes and ED visits. We believe that understanding these
relationships is crucial for informing urban planning policies and
public health initiatives aimed at improving children’s health in New
York City.

#### Anticipated Data Sources

- Environmental data:

New York City Air Quality (Kaggle:
<https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/sahityasetu/new-york-city-air-quality>)

NOAA Weather Data for temperature
(<https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/metadata/geoportal/rest/metadata/item/gov.noaa.ncdc:C00861/html>)

NYC Parks and Recreation Data (<https://www.nycgovparks.org/about/data>)

- Health and demographic data:

For ED visits and respiratory health outcomes
(<https://a816-health.nyc.gov/hdi/epiquery/visualizations?PageType=ts&PopulationSource=Syndromic&Topic=1&Subtopic=39>)

#### References

Heaviside, C., Macintyre, H., & Vardoulakis, S. (2017). The urban heat
island: implications for health in a changing environment. Current
environmental health reports, 4, 296-305.

Sheffield, P. E., Herrera, M. T., Kinnee, E. J., & Clougherty, J. E.
(2018). Not so little differences: variation in hot weather risk to
young children in New York City. Public health, 161, 119–126.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.puhe.2018.06.004>
